+++
date = "2018-01-07"

title = "The Medicaid and Appalachian Health, SES, and Ecological OMAS Assessment Study"

summary = "The Ohio Medicaid Assessment Survey (OMAS) is an Ohio-specific assessment that provides health care access, utilization, and health status information about residential Ohioans at the state, regional and local levels, with a concentration on Ohio’s Medicaid, Medicaid-eligible, and non-Medicaid populations."

image_preview = "omas.png"

tags = ["health"]

categories = ["Health"]

external_link = ""

math = false

# image = "headers/omassm.jpg"
# caption = "My caption :smile:"
+++

The Ohio Medicaid Assessment Survey (OMAS) is an Ohio-specific assessment that provides health care access, utilization, and health status information about residential Ohioans at the state, regional and local levels, with a concentration on Ohio’s Medicaid, Medicaid-eligible, and non-Medicaid populations. The OMAS mission is to assist the efficient and effective administration of Ohio’s Medicaid program. A random digit dial telephone survey first fielded in 1998, OMAS is in its seventh iteration and enables tracking of the state’s health system and health status. Data collection for the 2017 OMAS has wrapped up and analyses of the 2017 OMAS will begin in January of 2018. 

The main topics for OMAS are health care access, health care utilization, insurance status, chronic and acute health conditions, mental health, health risk behaviors, and health demographics such as employment, income, and socioeconomic indicators. These topics assist the Ohio Department of Medicaid and other health-associated state and local agencies in identifying health services and system gaps and assist in developing strategies for improving health services to Ohio’s population.

The Medicaid and Appalachian Health, SES, and Ecological OMAS Assessment paper will be completed by Ohio University's Voinovich School with assistance from the Ohio Department of Medicaid (ODM) and the Ohio Colleges of Medicine Government Resource Center (GRC). The study will address foundational information relating to: 

(a)	Health statuses (medical, mental, dental), health risks (e.g., substance use, chronic disease, disability, etc.), determinants of health, health care access, health care utilization, unmet health needs; 
(b)	SES indicators such as employment, poverty, medical and other debt, education, health burdens, etc.; and 
(c)	Ecological factors such as employment-base (e.g., manufacturing-base, etc.), housing stock, family composition (e.g., children in family/household, divorce, etc.), select other health demographics, and community security. 

The study will combine longitudinal quantitative data with thicker descriptions gathered from nine semi-structured interviews/focus-groups conducted in select locations (counties) in Appalachian Ohio. Expected completion date is June 30, 2018, so watch this spoace!  

